Giving people the tools that they want
to use is what this space is all about.
And so I'm a user choice maximalist.
People should be able to use what they
want and we're happy to support them in
whatever they choose.
[Music]
Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask them yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoay.com and I'm
your host Dylan Grabowski. In this
episode, we're joined by Sam McFersonen,
the CEO of Phoenix Labs, an RND group
dedicated to building out the Spark
protocol ecosystem.
In today's conversation, we discussed
the genesis of Maker and its transition
into a DAO model. The rebrand of Maker
Dow to Sky. Stable coins as crypto's
killer use case. Onchain yieldbearing
stable coins. Spark as the largest
onchain capital allocator. The role of
yield from realworld assets. Helping to
onboard the next 100x users and so much
more. Just a reminder, nothing said on
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens and that the guests or a
host might hold tokens discussed in any
given episode. You can check out a full
disclaimer at www.neontoday.com.
Also, if you enjoyed this episode,
please rate and review it on your
favorite podcasting platform and share
it with your friends and family. Every
rating, review, like, and comment helps
us reach more people and bring you more
of your favorite guests. With all that
said, I really enjoyed speaking with
Sam, and I hope you enjoy the
conversation, too. Hey everyone, welcome
to the Smart Economy podcast. Today,
we're joined by Sam McFersonen, the CEO
of Phoenix Labs, an R&D group dedicated
to building out the Spark Protocol
ecosystem. How are you doing today, Sam?
I'm doing great. Good to be here.
Absolutely. Um, it was really fun to
kind of like delve into uh what you're
working on with Spark. We were talking
earlier that I'm based here in Colorado
and I remember years ago in like 2019
going to community events where they
were giving out dye to kind of like
onboard users into blockchain and and
show how stable coins can be used um to
purchase things like beer at local
events. So, it's really cool to kind of
like be talking to someone who was once
a part of that ecosystem and is still
adjacent. But before we kind of like
delve into what Spark is working on and
your background in Sky, I'm curious to
just hear a little bit more about your
background uh because it's super
interesting. You've got a variety of
verticals. You were working um I don't
even know what what Mother Tinsumi
wiring is. You worked in the gaming
space um and then you also worked at
Sandboxed. So before your kind of like
intro into Sky, can you share what your
background was and how you landed into
working in the blockchain and crypto
space? Yeah, sure. So I've been a
software engineer for uh it's like
probably about 20 years now. Basically
all my life. And before the blockchain,
I was a video game developer. So I
worked on a small company. We didn't
really release any big titles, but uh we
were working on a startup. But then I
kind of got sucked into the DeFi world
and I haven't really looked back since.
So how I got started in the space, I
think like most people I I joined in in
like this 2017 ICO cycle just hobbyist
investor like I I was aware of Bitcoin
like for a while before that but it was
really the smart contracts that got me
interested in the space as a software
engineer. And so Ethereum was like the
first thing where I'm like actually kind
of more deeply getting involved. And
then I think like most people do in the
ICO cycle, they're just like looking
down the charts, they want to find some
high upside uh stuff and that looks
interesting. And so, you know, in a sea
of like Dentacoin and all this
craziness, I I found like Maker and I'm
like, "Ah, there's a product. It makes
sense. Stable coin, uh there's cash
flows." So, me as a fund like a value
investor, I I gravitated towards this.
And so just longtime lurker on the forum
there for like a couple years just
learning digging into all the smart
contracts and how how this stuff works.
Um and then I joined the protocol in an
official capacity in May 2021. I joined
the protocol engineering team and this
is actually the inception of the DAO
taking over the reigns from maker
foundation. So up until about that
point, the maker foundation was like
running the protocol and then there was
this transition phase to the DAO. So uh
I never actually worked for the
foundation. I came in like most of the
other people actually came from the
foundation and then they joined in these
what what we called core units but I I
joined in from from the community. Yeah,
that's super cool. I actually got into
the blockchain space as a token
speculator as well in 2017. And it was
largely because I'd like done all my
research on index funds and 401ks and
did everything I could to figure out
what like traditional investments were.
And then everybody kept calling Bitcoin
a scam. So I was like, "All right, why
is it a scam?" And I orangepilled
myself. So yeah, it was it was a super
cool time. I actually never got involved
in Ethereum back then because
CryptoKitties clogged the network and it
was too expensive to use and so the
market was kind of like hungry for
different blockchain networks that you
could tokenize and and launch ICOs on
top of. Um, we're in a completely
different world from then though. So,
were you building on Ethereum back then?
Were you were you like testing out smart
contracts or were you just purely from
like an investor's perspective and and
just kind of like playing around in
blockchain back then just by like
acquiring tokens and checking out
different networks? Yeah, so I mean
hobbyist investing was the first uh
point of entry. Um but then learning how
to do smart contracts. I I started that
in a serious way in 2020. So I started
learning solidity. I wrote uh a few of
the contracts that actually went into
production at at Maker um shortly after.
So I wrote like a flash minting module.
I think that was one of the first that I
did as well as the PEG stability module
which uh it's actually been replaced
about a year ago, but it was in
production for quite a while holding uh
billions of uh USDC back in 2020. Yes,
we uh I built that as part of the
community and then um yeah, I went into
production and like I was like I was
like this is the coolest thing ever
seeing stuff uh that you build like you
know then suddenly cussing billions of
dollars it's a little bit surreal. Yeah,
I was I was pretty pretty hooked on it
from there on out. What was um the kind
of like mental gymnastics I guess would
be the best way to put it that you had
to go or maybe the mental hurdles of
working for a DAO when you came from
working from like a centralized entity?
Was there like some kind of like
psyching yourself up and talking
yourself into going to work in this
crazy web 3 blockchain paradigm or or
was it just like an opportunity that you
were willing to jump at and being an
employee of a DAO was just kind of like
part of the game? No, actually quite the
opposite. I've been an entrepreneur all
my life, so risk and, you know, doing
unique things is like in my blood. So I
I'm quite comfortable in these types of
situations. It's actually I've I've
basically never had like a more
traditional job. I've always like had
startups, you know, with varying degrees
of success over the years. So, yeah,
working in a DAO is just like it Yeah,
it wasn't that much of an adjustment.
I'm very comfortable in a in a place
where like we're forging new territory
basically. So, that that's what's
exciting to me. Cool. And so other than
the projects that you just mentioned
that your your contracts that were
launched when you were at Maker Dow
tenure was kind of like during the
bareish market following post FTX. So
what was just like the mentality of what
you were working on during that time and
what were just kind of like the vibes of
being at a Dow kind of like during a
bare market. Yeah. So I like actually
when uh we started it was like just as
the at the start of like the 2021 bull.
So like we went through like a full bull
bear cycle with uh when I was at
protocol engineering and I mean I must
say I much prefer bare markets like the
bull market stuff as an engineer you're
just getting like pulled in so many
directions. We have to do this. We have
to do this. We have to do this. Like it
just it's like a break neck speed thing.
And like although I mean obviously we
never compromised on safety. It's just
like it can be kind of a stressful
environment, especially with a lot of uh
projects that were taking massive
shortcuts and just being completely
reckless, you know, FTX, Teruna, this
kind of stuff. So, yeah, I thought that
was super annoying personally. And then
like once it's all over, you're like,
okay, now we can actually just build
like real long-term products that are
sustainable and we have peace and quiet
for a few years. So, I much prefer the
bare bear part of the cycle. Yeah, I do
too. Um, I spend a lot of my time being
a content creator on socials. And during
bull runs, I I always equate it to, if
you probably might not be able to relate
to this, but before I worked in in
crypto, I was working in an office job
and we had cubicles. And I always
equated it to like having the cubicle by
the water cooler where everybody would
just like meet and talk and be loud and
ruin your flow and your concentration.
And during bull runs, that's what it's
like. Everybody's chasing the shiny
thing. you feel like an idiot for for
not chasing the shiny thing too. There's
a new shiny thing the next day. So, they
do say like bare markets are for
builders and I 100% agree. Are you
noticing that there's a different
appetite for stable coins and stable
coin yield in the various different kind
of like market cycles we have or are
kind of like the demand for stable coins
maturing beyond like the the bull bust
cycles? Yeah, I think like stable coins
are one of the strongest uh product
market fits that has that crypto has
currently and it's like it's already
proven itself in my in my books. Like
through the bull and bear cycles, you
see stable coin supply just going up and
to the right. There's some small dips,
but it's like it's just up and up and up
because it's pretty clear like for
people in uh third world countries who
maybe don't have access to banking, they
want to hold their money in a store of
value such as the US dollar or
international uh money transfers. Um I
don't know like I don't know how many
listeners have done this themselves but
it's like it's it's it's crazy like it's
just such a slow system. So for these
use cases and you know payments and
stuff like that I think stable coins
have already established themselves. So
uh where we're more sitting with uh USDS
is on the onchain yieldbearing side of
things. So Tether and Circle are are
doing quite well with uh building the
high liquidity portion of of this, but
we're aiming uh the S the yield bearing
SUSDS version of of USDS as the place
where you can park your your idle funds.
So you could be earning at least the
risk-free rate and sometimes during uh
bull market conditions, you could be
earning uh sometimes even double digit
uh percentage. Yeah. And so I understand
that crypto is a global phenomena, but
we're based in North America and
currently there's stable coin
legislation going through the US. Like
it or not, like the US can wreak havoc
on the rest of the world for builders or
it can make it easier for builders to to
build. And so from your perspective on
what Spark is working on and maybe even
if you can just wear your hat for the
time that you were at Maker Dow, what
does something like the Genius Act or
the Stable Act going through American
Congress mean for for how you build? I
I'm not like an expert in the
legislation or in the bills, but there
is a part that is trying to ban yield
bearing stable coins. And so what what
is from your perspective like how much
weight does this actually have? Is it
something you're holding your breath
over? Will there still be a role for uh
yield bearing stable coins? If one of
these bills goes through and is
unfavorable to them? Yeah. So first I
want to differentiate the different kind
kinds of stable coins. So this bill is
uh aimed at fiat back stable coins. So
this is like your circles and your
tether and stuff like that. products
like USDS are fundamentally onchain uh
products and so they don't interface
directly with with the banking system.
So yeah, just first and foremost that
legislation is aimed at those stable
coins. I you know I've seen this banning
of yield bearing component. This is
clearly introduced by the banking lobby
um because they want to keep the margins
uh where they take advantage of
depositors within traditional finance.
So uh I like the general move towards uh
embracing crypto making sensible
regulations. I think this is uh very
very good for the consumer but I do not
see banning uh forwarding yield to users
as anything but just a money grab by the
by the banking lobby. Yeah. I mean
that's who we're here to replace. Um
because centralized power can kind of be
corrupted. Absolutely. Um, if we look at
like 2008 and and the financial crisis
and the housing crisis, like that was
spurred on by centralized financial
institutions. Do you think that in 2025
we still have this like appetite, this
desire for people to escape like the
traditional system and chase something
onchain like uh SUSDS? What's like the
appetite for onchain access to stable
coins uh versus like custodial solutions
like USDC or USDT? Are we starting to
see an inflection point where more
people are choosing to come on chain and
leverage these decentralized stablecoin
solutions or are we still kind of like
climbing that hill? Yeah, I mean we're
definitely still climbing that hill.
There's like as much as the industry is
growing, we're still small in comparison
to Tradfi. But I view stable coins as
the black hole that's uh sucking up
everything into uh DeFi and we're just
kind of at the start of it. So it all
starts with the tokenization of the US
dollar which is uh you know what these
stable coins are. And then uh with the
rising interest rates you start this is
why you see the growth in this uh next
next adjacent thing which is tokenized
treasury bill products things like black
rockck bidd and others um because of the
high interest rate environment this is
precisely why these are just growing so
so quickly but it's just going to
continue to snowball and move down the
risk curve. So, uh, tokenized corporate
debt, um, and eventually getting to
private credit. All these things are
eventually going to come on chain one by
one. Um, and so I'm a firm believer
that, uh, everything will be tokenized
in the long run just because of the
massive efficiency improvements, um, in
in in blockchain technology. So, for
something like Trifi, it's uh, it's
incredibly clunky, like, you know,
sending around calling people and
sending spreadsheets and stuff like
that. It's just it's crazy. It's very
old school with the blockchain, you
know, you could send somebody any amount
of money across the entire world like
within you have just basically just
waiting for settlement on Ethereum or
whatever blockchain uh you're on. So
you're talking about like 15 to 20
minutes basically at most for
settlement. So this sort of improvement
in and of itself compared to Trifi where
you're talking about T+1 T plus two
which means it takes days and then it's
not operating on the weekend. like this
is just so old school and maybe you
think why does this matter but these
inefficiencies translate into friction
on the economy and so you kind of see
this as just the economy being less uh
productive basically so at crypto like I
think this is something that's very
clear what the path to solving this is
and I I think it's it's inevitable at
this stage yeah I had a very frustrating
experience this weekend where for some
reason out of nowhere I was just locked
out of my bank account and I couldn't go
online to transact or to send money
around and they had to make me call
customer service to give them my
password even though there's an online
portal and I could have just accessed it
from the same computer from the same
network that I'd accessed it for years
prior. Um, and that's just as a retail
user that's just as one Joe Schmo, you
know, I can only imagine the
inefficiencies that arise at more of an
institutional scale. So you mentioned
Black Rockck and you mentioned all these
various different sort of verticals of
tokenization.
I'm curious to hear how you're looking
at that in terms of which kind of like
tokenized treasuries, which kind of
tokenized privatized debt can be
leveraged to earn yield on behalf of
yield bearing stable coins. If you go to
uh Sparks liquidity layer, and I know
we're kind of getting ahead of of we're
putting the the horse in front of the
cart here, but one of the largest
allocated assets distributed is Black
Rockck's Biddle Fund, and it's the USDC
in there. So, what are the relationships
with like these new tokenized RWAs and
how they can be leveraged by liquidity
solutions like Spark? As you mentioned,
the Spark liquidity layer is the newest
product that we've come out with. uh it
just launched in November of last year
but already it's scaled up to $3.6 6
billion and we are the largest onchain
capital allocator and the basic idea
there is that uh we have this capital to
deploy and we want to basically just
have every opportunity available and so
historically onchain has been very
isolated from other things such as you
know exchanges or treasury bill products
or other RWAs and so the revenue that
was being generated by uh Maker DAO at
the time now rebranded to Sky was
largely being driven by onchain over
collateralized crypto lending. So this
is you lock up some bitcoin or some ETH
and then you can take out a loan against
that. This is how maker was created. So
I think maybe a lot of people are
familiar with this but as uh the space
has matured we just get all these new
options available and really it's just
been like going faster and faster in the
past few years in particular. So uh
black rock bidd is a good example of
this. Uh this is the treasury bill
yield. So instead of having funds parked
in stable coins earning nothing, you
park it in black rockck bidd and then
you can earn the treasury bill rate
which tradfi terms this is known as the
risk-free rate. So it's like the risk is
essentially the same as holding like
cash and so you might as well be getting
this yield. It makes no sense not to be
getting this yield basically. So because
of all these opportunities that are
available, the Spark liquidity layer is
able to deploy capital at you know the
scale of billions of dollars into each
of these and continuously look for where
the best opportunity is and rebalance
the portfolio even on the next block in
the blockchain. So like we have uh we've
been rapidly expanding this. We have
support for uh three tokenized treasury
bill products, Black Rockck Biddle,
Superstate USDB and uh Centrifuge uh
Janice Henderson JTRSY.
Um so that's at the tokenized T bill
portion. There is Sparkland which is you
know the bread and butter this uh
overcolateralized crypto lending. Uh we
this is still the biggest revenue driver
for Spark as a whole. So um this is
great and it's a strong use case for
DeFi. We've also onboarded uh Athena. So
this gives access to centralized
exchange funding rates. So uh this is
people who are taking leverage on
perpetual futures these types of
products with Bitcoin and ETH. And so
there needs to be uh funding on the
other side of that. So when people are
taking high leverage, the funding rates
go up quite high. And so we're able to
deploy capital into that to not only
allow people to take this leverage in
the first place, but also it generates a
very good return during bull market
conditions. So we can tap into that that
way. And then more recently uh we've
also onboarded a product called uh Maple
Ser USDC. So this is primarily uh
Bitcoin lending offchain. So, it's it's
kind of the same thing that's being done
onchain in products like Sparkland,
except this is being facilitated
offchain, but this same exact same
thing. People uh have their Bitcoin,
they lock it up, and then they can take
a loan, but this time it's in a
custodian, qualified custodian versus uh
onchain. Super cool to kind of hear
about the products and partners you
have. Maple and Centrifuge are former
guests of the Smart Economy podcast. So,
it's nice to continue to expand our
repertoire of um onchain builders and
and yield deliverers. Before we kind of
like delve into the products and
partnerships, let's just take like one
quick step back. Let's just start there.
What's your what's Phoenix Labs and the
relationship with Sky? Yeah, so maybe uh
to provide some context on this list of
names that you gave. Uh I I recognize it
can be a little confusing at times. So,
previously everything was in was under
Maker Dow. So uh there was the DAO
structure and then there's the protocol
these two separate things. So in
addition to creating one of the first D5
protocols, Maker was also trying out
this DAO thing for real at scale. And so
I I don't think anybody ever expected
the first iteration of Dows to work
perfectly, right? So there was uh it was
a good like first attempt but um there
was recognized pretty quickly there was
not uh going to work to be able to like
a govern a protocol at scale to have
this like token weighted vote on
everything type structure. And so there
was a proposal that passed called the uh
endgame proposal which would restructure
things such that you could think of it I
think the best analogy is that uh maker
then now transition to the brand under
sky. So Sky is the new version of Maker
would function more like a a central
bank in that it would not be making uh
any decisions really on where to
allocate funds, what growth initiatives
to do. Um instead it would outsource
that to these uh subdows uh which are
also called stars. And so Spark is one
of these stars and there are going to be
multiple of these stars that are focused
on different uh niches. And so with this
structure you get specialization. So
Spark is uh focused we are uh you know
engineer heavy team at Phoenix lab and
so we can focus on like a specifically
Ethereum EVM L2 type uh space and others
that are maybe experts at things like uh
you know Solana SVM there could be a
separate team working on that. So in
this structure, Sky can issue wholesale
credit to these stars such as Spark. And
so uh we're able to borrow from Sky and
then deploy it somewhere else and then
there'll be some spread on this and then
the uh net interest there is uh retained
to spark. So the relations like you can
think of it like central bank commercial
bank although I don't want to say it's
exactly like that but I think it's a
useful analogy then just to make sure I
understand like the way in which spark
is able to pay for itself to exist is by
using the revenue that's generated from
the assets that are borrowed from the
sky ecosystem and then deployed onto
like spark liquidity layer sparkland
things of this nature. Yes, that's
exactly right. And like one of our main
KPIs you can see on this uh like
data.sspark.fi
website is we have the APY there. So we
have 3.6 billion deployed and it's
earning 4.85%. And so it's it's the
Spark liquidity layer's job to basically
get as much possible uh APY on that
capital as possible. This is the design
of the system. It's going so it's it's
one of the most advanced uh capital
allocation systems that exists within
DeFi. all for the purpose such that you
can deposit into something like uh SUSDS
or uh SUSDC and you'll be earning this
yield on your USDS and you can you can
you don't have to worry about all the
complexities of DeFi. You just kind of
set it and forget it and know that we're
working on your behalf uh to deliver the
best yield possible. How is this 4.85%
APY distributed? Is it distributed to
Spark token holders? Um is it
distributed to just people who
contribute uh various different stables
to the liquidity layer? Yeah, so this is
protocol revenue but more or less you
can think of it going mostly to holders.
So the uh SUSDS yield right now is 4.5%
and we're able to generate slightly
higher than that and the market is like
it's picking up a little bit but it's
still relatively dead. We basically have
this system in place that when the uh
rates start going up everywhere, we're
in prime position to basically just tap
into all of that across all the
opportunities in DeFi, CFI, and Trady.
So that that yield will scale up as as
the market goes. And so you're uh you as
a depositor like again, you don't have
to worry about it. You don't have to
worry about chasing yield or anything
like that. Like we're doing that uh on
your behalf. you could help me and the
listeners kind of like correlate
external markets that drive the the
interest rate or the or the market for
stables. What would that be? I mean like
if for instance if you look at like high
levels of custodial or non-custodial
exchanges you see there's a lot of
trading on like days of max fear and so
a lot of rewards are distributed to like
DEX token holders on that day because
there was an external event uh fear that
drove people to trade. What are the sort
of like correlations with external
markets that benefit the interest rate
that you were just talking about? Yeah,
I mean for interest rates it's driven by
in crypto like by far speculation. So
when people expect the prices to go go
up in particular, this causes people to
borrow as much money as possible and buy
more of the token to to get leverage. So
we're lending this leverage, right? And
so there's a finite amount of stable
coins in this in in in DeFi, like you
know, it's on the order of a couple tens
of billions that are actively sitting in
these yield bearing products. Um and so
that's a finite amount of capital if
somebody's uh like you know only so much
can be borrowed by people on centralized
exchanges and uh in DeFi lending and
stuff like that. So eventually it just
it runs out and so once it starts
approaching this running out that's what
you see as rising interest rates. The
rates have to go up to kind of cool down
the market because you can't run out
entirely or else you get you get things
like um you know DPEGs and stuff like
that. So to keep the whole system safe,
you have to raise the interest rates to
curb the excess behavior basically. And
this is true for like everywhere
basically, you know, this is like banks
do this like Yeah. Were there any kind
of like valuable lessons learned or kind
of any interesting perspectives that you
were able to glean from how crypto
markets and and borrow lend markets
reacted to the recent kind of like hyper
downfall that we saw um as a result of
President Trump's tariffs. We saw like
massive market dumps. This was one of
those times in the blockchain space
where we really see if your code
operates as it's supposed to. So, were
there any kind of like interesting
insights that you and your team were
able to glean as a result of like this
kind of pure uh peak FUD moment that we
saw in Q2 of 2025? Yeah, I'm going to be
honest. At this point, it's actually
pretty routine. Like, we've gone through
this even way more extreme stuff. I
would say actually the most extreme
event we went through was the Teral Luna
DPEG because there was I think at this
at the time uh die was about 10 billion
market cap and it was like two billion
like about 20% of the deposits lag uh
were were wiped out like and it was
perfect the protocol even behaved
perfectly fine then. So yeah, we've been
through many of these uh like really
really sort of peak fear events, but
like at this point I think like uh
especially like CDP lending is like
there's actually been no bad debt over
the like all the many years of
operating. So uh it's probably like one
of the safest ways to get access to
crypto speculation uh leverage yield.
It's just tried and true. And so at this
point, you know, yeah, we watch things
all the time, of course, uh, but it's
it's, you know, it's routine in crypto
at this stage, I would say. Um, Maker
was probably like one of the first real
world or I guess maybe like the one of
the first projects that people who
operate in borrow lend and in real world
traditional institutions. This was one
of the first times that we saw like a
real use case for why blockchain, why
leverage open source code? And it's
because we can kind of like do borrow
lend according to math. And so we have
this problem in the crypto space where
old things aren't shiny and sexy anymore
and they lose market attention. And so
this was always kind of like my thought
process into why Maker Dow rebranded
into Sky. Where am I wrong? there
there's got to be more for the rebrand
other than we're going to slap a new
shiny sticker on something that that's
been working for years. Um, what was the
purpose of of changing the identity of
one of like the longest running most
realworld usable onchain apps basically?
Yeah. So uh the reason for the rebrand
primarily is um so I know everybody in
DeFi loves the die brand and uh they're
all used to it but it was sort of a
decision that needs to be made for like
we're looking at onboarding the next you
know 10 100x people into the space and
where to like where to position yourself
and so not having USD in the name is
like an impediment. It's like this extra
hurdle you kind of have to explain
things to people. So from a product
perspective, it's much much easier to
just be, you know, the third largest
stable coin. And then so you've got
USDT, USDC, USDS, right? You know what
it is. It's very straightforward of what
it is even without having to mention
beyond that. So that was the main reason
why I in my mind the rebrand was
important was preparing for the the next
phase of growth. So it's a little bit of
short-term pain for long-term gain. Have
you seen like an uptick in I guess
interest from
new retail or institutional users post
rebrand? Yes. So you can look at the
again like the we like where we're
coming from is we want transparency is
is the new thing that blockchains can
deliver when you're investing in a
product like we've uh this dashboard
that we put out the data.spark.fi you
can literally see every single dollar
where it is deployed across DeFi. So
this is uh already a big advantage I
think we have over like more traditional
finance type type venues. Um so in terms
of growth yes like as part of the stats
like we track like what the number of
deposits are and it's like there's been
great growth over the past few months.
Um the supply stands at about $7 billion
right now. Still maintaining our
position as the third largest uh stable
coin. Um but on the lending side
actually we've seen a lot of uh very
exciting interest institutions finally
uh really want to dive in on the onchain
stuff and so this is just been having
conversations with lots of big names
where like uh it's like they're ready to
come on chchain and we much like we're
onchain native we want to stay away from
trifi stuff as much as possible while we
do want to cater to these uh venues if
people want to use their own custodian
offchain that's fine uh I don't think
that's a
But you know, as I mentioned, the the
CDP system, the overcolateralized
lending on chain, this is one of the
most robust systems. The fact that you
can do instant liquidations, uh it just
gives you so much more certainty. And so
this combined with the transparency just
gives like this is what it like a stable
coin is, right? It's like first and
foremost, you need to have trust that
it's going to hold its value. And so
USDS is the the best positioned here in
my view. that it's the oldest protocol
like the balance sheet is uh is onchain
entirely now and you know maybe it's not
for everybody but like we just want to
build the the most uh the best risk
adjusted yield within uh within DeFi. I
do want to give you and your team a
shout out to the the data dashboard. It
is super clean, super sleek. Um it's
phenomenal to kind of like see the
different partners that you're working
with. um an an easy dashboard to capture
total revenue and projected annual
revenue. And then you also have at the
very bottom of the Spark liquidity layer
and activity section. And for anybody
who's ever used GitHub, um it looks very
similar. Uh it's like a heat map that's
dedicated to the amount of activity that
has been seen. And basically since June
of last year, it's just been getting
hotter and hotter with more and more
events taking place on days. So um what
what are these events on the like little
activity subsection of the dashboard?
What what classifies as something that
gets added to this heat map? Yeah, so
what you're viewing as an event is uh
the system is automated. So it will it's
plugged into Sparkland uh a Morpho um
fluid and so each of these markets has
and multi-chain as well. So like we're
on uh Ethereum base arbitum just
recently launched optimism and uni
chain. So the idea is that we just plug
this into all the markets and it just
sits there and watches the rates once if
somebody borrows on this market we just
automatically move more capital in. So
effectively the way to think about this
is this is solving uh multi-chain and
multi- uh lending market liquidity
fragmentation within the space which is
going to be super important because this
is one of the big issues especially with
um Ethereum in the L2 road map. I mean
it's great for scalability but then you
have this trade-off with liquidity
fragmentation. So for as much as the
capacity of the balance sheet that we
have access to, we're actually able to
smooth over this issue. So that if
you're on uh arbitum, you want to borrow
$100 million that that's perfectly fine.
You can go ahead and do that and then uh
like the Spark liquidity layer will fill
that capacity in. So or do it on base,
do the same thing, different assets. So
like this is uh this is the idea here.
What's the what does the world look like
then when we have multiple VMs that are
being leveraged maybe like move VM,
Salana VM in addition to EVM? Because
the chains you just mentioned are
composable like like base, uni chain,
arbitrum, they're all EVM. You mentioned
that you work on the Ethereum and the
EVM portion of Spark, but you're also uh
have a portion of the team that's
dedicated to like the Salana ecosystem.
So I'm sure there's a part of the road
map that has multivvm support. So what
does that world look like? Like how far
away are we from if I don't want to
borrow $100 million on arbitron, what if
I want to do it on Salana? How how far
away are we from Spark being kind of
like the solution for this multi-chain
multiVM need? And so we're actively
looking at this uh under spark but also
as I mentioned there can be other uh
stars subdows that are focused on some
specialization. So our team is not uh
particularly toolled up for the Salana
ecosystem but it doesn't mean that
market shouldn't be served. So similar
systems will be uh deployed as well uh
within the Salana ecosystem with a team
that is expert in that field you know
under a different uh star so that uh sky
as a whole USDS you provide this similar
experience where people can just come
deposited into the yield bearing USDS
and then the the the complexities of
DeFi are just completely uh taken away
and you just can be confident that
you're earning the best possible
riskadjusted yield whether you want to
on Salana or you know one of these newer
chains. I think as a user especially
someone who's new to DeFi like it can be
very confusing and scary especially when
you start looking at this isn't what
what's in Spark's purview but like
liquidity pools you have like these LP
tokens and and multiple tokens and
impermanent loss. And one of the issues
is that it's really easy to kind of like
get wrecked learning how to use these
these tools. And so something that I
found really interesting about the Spark
platform is that you have this sandbox
where users can play in it before they
actually start going on mainnet and
borrow lending their assets. So what is
the sandbox? Uh what was kind of like
the impetus for the tool and are there
any kind of like success stories that
you've seen from users who maybe made a
mistake in the sandbox before they
actually deployed it on mainet? It's
important that we're dealing with like
real people's money here. And so, uh,
what we wanted to go for with the Spark
app is, uh, not like some marvel of, uh,
engineering complexity is that we wanted
to just like this is the like, you know,
we can distill DeFi into like these core
components that it just make it as
simple as possible to use. So, the
savings product uh, is the is is
designed to be exactly that. you know,
you have some USDC in your wallet, you
have some USDT, you have some USDs. Like
I think people are familiar with this
and then they just want to get a yield
on it. So you just go to Spark Savings
and then you try it. But at the same
time, uh you know, people don't
necessarily want to be throwing around
large chunks of money into something
that like they're just trying for the
first time. So we provide the sandbox uh
tools such that we just uh give like you
know $10,000 of of every token basically
and then you could just mess around with
the in on the interface as much as as
you want to. And so this is just to get
a feel for how this stuff works so you
can get more comfortable with it. But
first and foremost the website is
designed to be the the make it as simple
as possible so you you can't you
basically can't injure yourself uh in in
DeFi. What's the process like then for
kind of like getting user feedback when
there's a token that's a a volatile
price? You usually hear uh people in
your corner when number goes up and and
you hear the salt boys when number goes
down, but because you're operating in
kind of a stableish realm, you probably
don't necessarily get these super
impassioned takes or people reaching out
to you on crypto Twitter. So, what's
what's like the process for the Spark
team then for for communicating with the
users? What is user feedback like? Yeah,
I mean it's usually quite good actually.
Um like such as yourself. Uh the I think
the team does a does a really good job
and so usually the feedback is is quite
positive when I hear it. uh I mean we do
get complaints with various things and
uh so there's like feedback mechanisms
on uh discord and such and so uh the
team is made aware of this stuff and you
know we try to improve where the rough
edges are as much as we can but like as
you said uh compared to like something
like uh maybe like a unis swap or other
decks I'm sure they get all kinds of
complaints about like you know I had
huge slippage and I lost my money and
like this is this just fundamentally a
different different product like we're
trying to be very boring like it's just
like your cash and then you can earn a
yield on it and then you can go pay
people and stuff like that. Like it's
just meant to be like very basic stuff,
but we want to be like the the front
page of DeFi where it's just it's it's
that simple by design. We don't like we
don't want to be how to do 10x leverage
with this like complex thing like no no
just here's here's a place to park your
funds and then you can use them when you
want to. That that's sort of what we're
going for with the website. Do you have
a sense of like your user profiles?
Because I've always thought that the way
I can onboard my dad who thinks that
just blockchain and crypto is a scam in
general is to show him that he can get
better yield on his parked capital maybe
through an onchain solution. And so
we're seeing number go up and to the
right with the amount of TVL and the
amount of revenue and the amount of
different partners that uh Spark has.
Are are you able to get a sense of who
these users are? Because one of the
problems we have building onchain
solutions is that we don't collect KYC
and we don't have like population
profiles to know what age groups are
participating and using our platforms
and our apps and our DAPs. So, have you
guys been able to like create a unique
solution to figure out who your users
are and how to capture kind of different
markets to bring them on chain? Yeah, I
mean, as you say, like DeFi is uh like
fundamentally anonymous. I mean, you can
kind of do some amount of tracking, but
more so uh we're looking at like the
different types of users. So, your dad
such as you said like maybe doesn't want
to use Deep DeFi, and that's okay. We
want to be able to provide the tools uh
such that people can get access to the
yields within DeFi especially during
bull markets because I I we think this
is a like a very a very good product
that I think people in tradi will will
want. So we look at it like there's kind
of three rings. There's the DeFi native
population and I think most people are
pretty aware of SUSDS in that space. We
go a bit further out in the more of this
uh DeFi mullet style where it's like you
have some centralized app or exchange or
something like that and we want to
provide them the backend infrastructure
such that they can plug their users in
if their stable coins on their platform
can just plug in to uh to DeFi in that
sense. And so I've seen some awesome
like I think there's been a lot of
progress in that uh recently. I think
earlier this year uh Coinbase launched
their uh Bitcoin borrow product. I mean,
this is not users lending their stable
coins. It's the reverse, but it's still
the same sort of style where it's like a
DeFi wallet where people can be on the
exchange, they can use Coinbase, they
like Coinbase, that's fine. They can
take their Bitcoin and then they can uh
take a loan out against it. Um, and then
we are actually supplying uh most of the
capital in that market actually. So,
Spark is actually 80% of the capital
supplied to that Bitcoin borrow product
uh that is that Coinbase has launched.
And so this style is like kind of more
the hybrid in between stage. We're happy
to support that as well and we've seen a
lot of a lot of growth there. And then
there's the next which is like deep
trady world. And so we're looking at uh
things like ETFs there like where we
have Bitcoin ETF, we have an ETH ETF.
You know, they'll probably be like a
sole ETF I assume. But I think yield
bearing stable coins is like a next
natural fit for uh ETF where we can
export this yield in a in a package that
people prefer, you know, in their 401ks,
stuff like that. We want to really just
meet the market where it is. And I I
think this will be incredibly compelling
product for those who don't necessarily
want to speculate on the price of
Bitcoin, but they want to, you know, get
a good yield. um you know if they're on
fixed income pension funds um the these
types of individuals may want some
exposure to what is a pretty good and
pretty uh safe yield uh uh that comes
out of DeFi during bull market
conditions in particular. Yeah. So like
if you look at the recent shakeup at the
Ethereum Foundation, you know, there
were there were two new co-executive
directors that were brought on and and
they're very product focused now and
kind of like a team that emerged as part
of that shakeup was was Etherealized,
which is like this Wall Street branch
that's going out to traditional
institutions and evangelizing as to why
they should build institutional
products, tokenized products on top of
Ethereum. Do you guys have a similar
branch or is there a star perhaps that
that was launched in order to kind of
like be this trady evangelization team
or is that just like not in the purview
of the sky umbrella? No, no, we're
definitely focused on this. So, at
Phoenix Labs and under Spark, uh we're
definitely talking to a lot of the major
institutions and uh actively looking for
doing things such as the the ETF. It's
still kind of in a early stages with
something like the ETF, but
institutional adoption I think is
already like I think it's really
shifting a lot. We've seen like a lot of
interest there. So like my team is doing
that and the other teams will do it as
well. So like the stars, you know, maybe
there can be one that's like focused on
that, but the stars in and of themselves
are going to do this type of business
development like all of them in in in
parallel. Yeah. Cool. So, when you're
out talking to institutions, I mean,
it's easy to kind of like espouse the
merits of getting interest on your
stables, but what is like their level of
interest in the Spark token? And maybe
we can also just use this as an
opportunity to to talk about what the
Spark token is and what its role is
within the Spark protocol umbrella.
Yeah, so the Spark token will be uh
launching soon. We've had uh great
success so far. We've been running a
pre-armming uh campaign uh on Sparkland
for a while. Uh Pendle just launched a
program a few weeks ago uh where with
PTUSDs for Spark points and so this this
uh we've just seen a lot of engagement
in the in the Spark uh ecosystem. So
yeah, when the token uh launches uh
users are going to be able to uh stake
it and uh it will also give uh
governance rights in the future as well.
Yeah, there's a lot of activity
actually. And so we're currently in
Sparkland season 2, which launched uh
two and a half weeks ago. So what are
these Sparkland seasons? From from the
outside looking in, they seem to be kind
of like userdriven
organic social media pushes. Yeah. So
the Sparkland uh campaign has been uh
running for a little while. That's the
older one. But there's been uh newer
campaigns like such as the the the
Pendle one which has launched recently
and uh yeah there's been a lot of
excitement for this on Twitter. Yeah, we
see just a lot of uptick. But yeah, I
mean we're getting close and uh we're
very excited to have this out there and
have a like a you know both the OGs who
have been with us since the beginning as
well as this whole new uh batch of uh
people who have come in and uh we're
just happy to get this thing launched
and uh really get the the subdow star
model uh live in production and and
scale this whole decentralized
governance thing. What are going to be
some if if you had to anticipate some
sort of like governance I don't want to
call them issues but uh governance
proposals that spark token holders might
participate in like how how do you view
future governance within the spark
protocol? Yeah. So um these are still
being uh worked under and uh the so
Spark has this relation with Sky in the
exchange for the privilege access to the
credit line. Spark has to operate within
the rules that uh Sky sets out. So
there's this whole it's called the atlas
that defines you know you could do
lending to this and this is like kind of
the risk framework involved with that
but it also will apply to governance. So
this uh TBD but it's like uh this will
be there also needs to be like some
distribution of the token first. So like
it'll come but it's like still being
worked on. Yeah. Is is the whole Spark
token then going to be a fair drop where
only Sparkline participants a
participants are able to gain access to
this or is there also going to be uh
like a premine like are you and your
team also competing for these spark
tokens with the the open and free
market? Well, I mean this is the very
unique thing about the uh Spark token
launch is that most of the there's no VC
uh investment or anything like that.
There's no giant unlock overhang. 65% of
the supply is going out as as farms.
It's public access. So you can deposit
your USDS or your uh Sky tokens and then
you receive uh SPK tokens in the farm.
So in this sense uh it looks a lot more
like a fair launch uh token. There's
like no insiders or anything like that.
there is a team allocation, but it's the
vast majority is going out in these in
these farms. So, we're uh very excited.
I think it's kind of a different meta
than what we've seen before with these
um you know, large supply unlocks after
a year. Um I think this will be very
interesting and I think it will align
the community a lot more with the
long-term vision of Spark. when we look
at uh like Spark Lend um there's various
different assets that users can borrow
against and there's multiple derivatives
of stable coins um and of Ethereum and
Bitcoin as well. So can you just share a
little bit about um how your team went
about choosing the various different
derivatives of ETH like we ETH R ETH and
the various different derivatives of
Bitcoin like CBBTC and LBTC um and and
why you chose them and maybe not some
other wrapped protocols. Yeah, I mean
Maker is a pioneer in the collateral on
boarding process in general. So um you
know we have a risk team called Block
Analytica that's been doing this uh
since DeFi existed basically and a lot
of the I mean there's a lot of criteria
that goes into making a decision about
whether to on board a collateral or not
but first and foremost it's going to be
come down to metrics like uh you know is
it like is there a large amount of TVL
in the project is there good liquidity
on secondary markets um these types of
uh evaluations and then you get a
ballpark figure for how much um loans
this will generate and so if you feel
it's met some sort of threshold then you
can start doing deeper due diligence
like evaluating the team track record
Lindy as well as like the smart contract
complexity things like admin access uh
you know is the governance process
around the protocol using best practices
this is an incredibly uh complex process
and you know it's it's like it's similar
with any sort of credit that you're
underwriting in DeFi or Tradfi, it's
just kind of like different things you
need to be focused on in DeFi, such as
you know, there's no smart contracts in
Tradfi, but you know, counterparty and
credit risk are very real things. So, it
it's it's all just it's just risk
analysis. It's been uh done for a while.
And uh in terms of DeFi, our our team is
one of the best in the space. Yeah. So,
as we're kind of like zooming out and
and wrapping up our time, um I'm just
curious to hear how Spark views the EVM
and and L2 landscape like what's your
process for choosing which chain to
support? Maybe Ethereum is is easy to
support because it has a large amount of
TVL. Maybe Bass is really easy to
support because that's had the most
rampant growth in the past year and a
half. But like what what was the team's
thought process on onboarding support
for arbitrum, optimism, uni chain and
and how do you look at other L2s that
you want to integrate support for? Yeah,
I mean it's it's kind of similar to the
collateral on boarding process. We're
just looking at user metrics. So like
it's not like we're even really
deciding. It's more like I mean there is
a decision there, but like it's like
we're just going where the users are and
that's kind of our ethos is we're not
picking winners and losers. We watch
what the market decides is a popular
chain. And so we just want to serve the
users that want to use Spark as a whole.
So if we see a lot of people on base,
this is where we'll uh you know expand
the Spark liquidity layer to um Spark
savings and stuff like that. So it's
really like that and as we improve this
process, we're going to be able to just
cater to more and more uh chains. So
that we really want to just be
ubiquitous such that in the sense that
we're solving uh liquidity
fragmentation, we can start getting away
from this select the chain thing in your
wallet and it's like really the whole
thing just feels like one like one
cohesive uh sort uh chain basically all
combined. Yeah. So, I'd be remissed if I
didn't talk about the kind of
perspective issues that the market and
that a lot of long-term onchain users
have had towards Ethereum over the past
year, year and a half. And a couple
times throughout this conversation,
you've mentioned these issues with
liquidity fragmentation. So from your
perspective where you stand like how
dire was the situation for just Ethereum
as a blockchain and as an ecosystem was
it ever really at risk? How did this L2
ccentric roadmap kind of hurt Ethereum
or or did it not really matter? Um, I'm
just kind of like curious in general to
hear your overall outlook on how we were
viewing Ethereum and and maybe like how
that might have changed over the past
quarter of this year. Yeah. Well, in
terms of liquidity fragmentation, I
actually don't view this as an issue at
all. I think it's kind of a temporary
thing. And with Spark liquidity layer in
particular, uh, we're actually
effectively solving this. So like as
we've just scaled this up over the like
past few months. So now actually because
we've plugged into uh A and Morpho and
Sparkland on all these various markets
as long as you're using one of the major
markets like you can go on a on base and
like borrow 500 million you could do
that right now and like it will fill it
in. So the rates will not be disjoint in
that sense. So that I think is kind of
just a temporary problem including and
as well as like solving it at the
application layer the bridging
infrastructure is getting a lot better
too. So you see things like super chain
a layer like this sort of uh making
improvements on the settlement time of
the uh of the crosschain interop is
going to be extremely important and so
us as an uh application layer any
improvement in the bridging
infrastructure we can take advantage of
that too that just it's just going to
continue to compound so like uh
liquidity fragmentation I uh for dollars
in particular I think because that is
the most important asset that's going to
be crosschain that's not going to be a
problem. I don't think at all. And I
think actually that's going to be solved
like this year basically with the uh
regards to the uh foundation pivot.
Yeah, I've been extremely heartened by
the the change in direction. I think the
I I think the L2 uh road map has has
always been correct. I I think it's the
best way to scale, but it's also I like
the fact that the L1 is not being
neglected. I think that was maybe a
little bit of a mistake to be like, you
know, get off the L1. I I think I view
it as like Ethereum and the L2s in that
the L2s will be successful and Ethereum
can be successful. I like I'm a positive
sum type guy. I think this is we're in a
very small uh market right now and
there's a lot of room to grow and so I
don't think we need to be uh going into
this zero sum mindset like I'm very pro
everything. I'm pro you know let's let
get Ethereum to grow, let's get base
arbitum to grow, all the other L2s,
let's get Salana to grow. I think giving
people the tools that they want to use
is what this space is all about. And so
I'm a user choice maximalist. People
should be able to use what they want and
we're happy to support them in whatever
they choose. That's a fantastic insight.
And I forgot to ask you this earlier
when we were on the the Maker Dow kind
of rebrand, but I've been part of an
ecosystem that had to do a token
migration. there's still to this day,
even though it's been two and a half
years since users were asked to migrate
tokens, there's still people who don't
know about that. So, can you what what
was like your insights that you gleaned
from users having to migrate D to to
USDS? If you go on to the Spark
platform, there's still D lending and
and borrowing and USDS. So are we is Sky
in in a world where there's support for
both D and USDS or do we ultimately want
to see kind of all die tokens migrate to
USDS? Oh, do we definitely don't have to
have all die tokens migrating to USDS?
Like um in fact even in spark line the
biggest market is still die. So like I
like I think it again maybe this is my
personal view but like I think people
should be free to use what they want. So
if they want to stay on die that's fine.
like I there's there's no problem with
that. So, but like really we're building
USDS for like the growth of the future
growth, but it's okay if people want to
stick around on die. I don't think
that's a problem. Cool. Well, you
mentioned a lot of products that just
launched by Spark. Is there anything on
the road map that we haven't really
touched upon yet that that you want to
highlight real quickly? Yeah, I mean the
main thing is really just getting out
onto all the main chains. Um really just
uh stepping on the gas with the Spark
liquidity layer. We want to just hook up
every single major exchange such that uh
solve liquidity fragmentation as much as
we can. I think we're we're getting
there. Like we were maybe like 20% of
the way there a few months ago. I think
we're past the 50% mark now. And like
really just get that like last little
bit in and then we can really improve uh
the experience and um you know being
backend infrastructure maybe people
don't uh see this stuff as much. But I
think we'll be we'll be uh excited when
people when the rates start going up and
suddenly, you know, uh there's not like
huge rate spikes on different lending
market instances. We'll be like, "Okay,
yes, we've solved the problem. We're
helping to uh grow the pie for everybody
in in DeFi." Awesome. Sam, for anyone
who listened to this, um who do you want
to reach out to you and what's the best
way that they can contact you? Yeah,
reach out to me anytime on Twitter. I'm
hexonaut. So, h e x o n a u t. Uh, so DM
me or, you know, reply to me. I usually
try to respond to most people's. Cool.
Well, thank you so much for your time
today, Sam. It was fantastic to dig into
Spark. Once again, I highly recommend
anybody goes to the data dashboard. It's
super cool to look around and and play
around on and really cool ways to kind
of uh borrow lens your stable coins. And
if you're interested in stable coin
yield, check out SUSDS. Um, appreciate
your time today, Sam. Yeah, thanks for
having me. Thank you for tuning in to
the Smart Economy Podcast. To stay in
the loop with all of our latest episodes
and insights, head over to
www.smarteconomyodcast.com.
And don't forget to subscribe to our
YouTube channel for all of our video
content. If you enjoyed today's
discussion, please consider showing your
support by liking, commenting, and
reviewing this episode on your favorite
podcasting platform. We'd also love to
hear from you. So, please don't hesitate
to drop a comment on Spotify or YouTube
to share what topics you'd like us to
cover or who you'd like to see as our
next guest. And if you or someone you
know would make a great guest, please
don't hesitate to reach out. We're
always on the hunt for fresh voices and
new perspectives.
For our NEO token holders out there,
please consider voting for NEO news
today as your council representative.
We've proudly been serving the NEO
ecosystem since 2017 and we'll continue
to do so by putting portions of our
council rewards directly back into
ecosystem growth initiatives. So with
all of that said, thank you once again
for listening to the Smart Economy
podcast and we can't wait to catch you
next time.
[Applause]